So in the last lecture we've written the loop. And we iterated through our posts and used template tags to get
information about each post.
So we checked that we have posts first using have_posts(). And then we mentioned that we should call a function
called the_post() in order for template tags to work properly.
And also in order to avoid an infinite loop.
But we don't really know how these functions work,
right?
And in order to become a better developer and to be able to debug problems in your code, it's much better
to understand what's going on behind the scenes.
So to get posts from the database WordPress has a very powerful PHP class called WP_Query.
This class accepts some query arguments and returns an object containing a lot of information and methods
about this particular query.
So let's say we want to create a widget that displays posts from a certain category.
First we will initialize a new instance of the WP_Query class and pass it  our query arguments.
So in our case we need to get the posts that have
category, that has an id of 4 .
Then we proceed and write the loop the same way we did in the last video.
But this time we'll call have_posts() as a method of the query instance. And same for the_post() function.
We'll also call it has a method of the query instance and not as a function like we did in the last video.
And then we can use template tags the same way we did before.
And that's actually not everything. You are writing a custom loop here which is different from the main
loop.
So in this case we must call a function called wp_reset_postdata().
So notice that I said a custom loop and that a main loop.
So what's the main loop and why did we write have_posts() and the_post() as functions and not as methods
when we were writing the loop in the index.php file?
And what is wp_reset_postdata()?  To answer these questions
let's see what WordPress does when it receives the request. And by receives the request I mean, you know,
when you type a URL in the browser like the one you see.
So for the URL we see, you are now requesting a page for a category called unicorns.
So WordPress will go and find all posts with category unicorns.
And that's what the main loop loop through.
So we've seen in the last slide, we defined a new variable and assigned it to a new instance of the WP_Query
class to get the posts. WordPress does the same thing.
It figures out the query from the URL and then it instantiates a new WP_Query class and assign
it to a global variable called  $wp_query. So the global $wp_query now becomes the main query.
And this loop is the main loop.
Any other WP_Query instances like the one we did in the last slide are secondary queries.
And the reason we call have_posts() in index.php directly as a function and not as a method
of a class instance is that we were looping through the main loop. And what the function have_posts() actually
is
it's just a shortcut function that calls the method have_posts() for the global WP_Query class instance.
So this is the source code for the have_posts() function. And it's essentially the same thing we did when
we were writing our custom query,
but now we're calling have_posts() for the global WP_Query instance.
I know this might sound a bit confusing to some of you.
So let's go back to index.php.
And when we wanted to create a custom loop we created a variable. Let's call it $custom. And then we
instantiate the new instance of the WP_Query class. And now to loop through the posts of the $custom
WP_Query instance, we call have_posts() as a method of the $custom instance,
right?
But now that we are looping through the main loop we just have to call the function have_posts(). And what
the function have_posts() will do? It will call
the have_posts() method on the global variable $wp_query.
So if we type here in the if condition have_posts() of the class instance wp_query. The global
variable $wp_query.
It's exactly the same thing.
have_posts() is just a wrapper function or a helper function that calls the method have_posts() on the global
$wp_query. And same for the_post() function.
So this is basically exactly the same thing as when we created a custom query only this time WordPress
is responsible for creating the WP_Query instance depending on the URL.
So I'm now using the var_dump() function to display the global $wp_query object.
We would like to know what this object will contain.
What will it look like?
So if we refresh now the browser. As you can see it's a very large object.
So let's view this a more formatted way.
So add PRE tags around the var_dump() here.
And let's take a look now. It's much clearer now.
And as you can see, if we for example visit the category let's say unicorns,
we will now have some query_vars as you can see. And if we scroll down we will find the key of posts
and this key will contain all the post that the WP_Query class found.
So here it is.
And as you can see it's an empty array probably because this category does not exist.
But if you go back now to the main page and see the same key. It's an array of 11 posts.
So I hope now it's clear the difference between the main query and any other custom query that we write.
So now that we've seen the $wp_query object in the browser and it looked something like this. This is just
a short version of it.
So this object had some information like the query vars and the post count.
It also had a key called current_post. And it's initially -1. And it had the array of posts found. And it
also had a key called post which is a post object.
So let's now try to visualize what happens to these values when we start our loop.
So imagine we have our main loop here on the left and we have the global $wp_query object
on the right which contains as we saw in the last slide the post count, the current post, an array of posts
and the post.
So let's assume now we've found two posts for this query.
So the post count will be 2 and the posts array will have two posts and the current post will be initially -1
and the post will be the first post in the posts array. And we'll also have another global variable which
is $post.
Remember when we were discussing template tags and we mentioned that if you did not pass the post id
to the template tag,
it will get its value from a global variable called $post.
So this is it. And initially its value will be the same as the post key
in the $wp_query object. So it will also be Post 1.
So let's go ahead now and trace the loop step by step and see how the values on the right will be
affected.
So the first line here,
if ( have_posts() ). As we mentioned before the have_posts() function will call the have_posts() method on the
$wp_query global object. And this method inside the WP_Query instance will compare the post count and
the current post. So the condition will be is current post + 1 less than post count.
So in our case is zero less than 2 which is true.
So have_posts() will return true. In the next line,
while ( have_posts() ).
So while 0 less than 2 which is true.
So we will enter the loop and move to the_post().
the_post() will also call a method called the_post() on the $wp_query  global object. And what this method
will do is that it will increment the current post. So the current post is now will be zero.
And  than it will set the post object to the first post in the post array.
So the key post in the $wp_query object is now equals to Post 1 and also it will set the global $post variable
to Post 1.
Now we'll move to the_title(). the_title() without any ID provided
will go to the global $post object and get its title from there. And this way we got the title of Post 1
In the second iteration
now current post is 0.
So the condition be is 1 less than 2 which is true.
So we will go to the_post().
the_post() will call the_post() method
in the $wp_query object. And this method will increment the current post by 1 and it will also set
the post inside the $wp_query object and the global $post variable to the second post in the posts array.
So now they will be Post 2. So now when we move to the next step and call the_title(). the_title() will go
to the global $post variable and it will get the title of the post saved there, which is Post 2. And
that's how the template tags get the right value without passing an ID to them.
So now finally in the last ilteration we will have condition 2 less than 2 which is false.
So the loop will now be finished.
So I think it's clear now how the loop works.
So remember in this slide when we were writing a custom wp_query and we mentioned that
at any custom wp_query you must call a function called wp_reset_postdata()
when you are done with the loop,
right?
So now we need to know why do we call this function when we are writing a custom wp_query.
So imagine we are displaying a template for a single blog post.
So if you have a list of posts and you click on one of them you'll go to a page that will display more
information about this post.
So this is the single blog post.
So in this case the $wp_query global object will only contain one post. Because we are not fetching a category
or an archive or just fetching one post. So now the $post global object will be the first and the only post
in the posts array in the $wp_query global object.
Right? So now let's say we want to display the post title. So we will call the_title(). the_title() will go to
the global $post object and it will get its title from there.
And maybe you also would like to display the content. So we will call the_content() which we also go to
the global $post variable and gets the content of this post.
Now imagine we want to display the related posts for this post.
Now you will have to write a custom query. This query will maybe gets the posts that share the same category
as the main post.
So notice now that when we start to loop in this custom query we will set in the global $post object
to the first post in this custom query. And as we move forward we will set it to the second post and
the custom query and so on.
Now imagine after the related posts we would like to get the category for the main post, for the original
post.
You see the problem. The category template tag
will go to the global $post object but it would have the wrong post.
It will have the last post in our custom query.
So that's why we call wp_reset_postdata() after any custom query to set the global $post object
back to the original post.
Right?
So let's now take a quick look on some of the source codes for some of the WordPress functions that we saw.
It's always a good idea to do that to maybe have a better understanding of what's going on behind the
scenes.
So here we have the have_posts() function. And we've seen that before.
It just calls the have_posts() method in the $wp_query global object.
So let's take a look at the have_posts() method
in the WP_Query class. And what it does as we saw in the loop visualization, it compares the current post +
1 with the post count.
And if that's true it returns true.
Otherwise it does some other things.
We don't have to go into more details for now.
Let's take a look now at the_post() function. And one of the things that it does is that it calls another
method called next_post(). And the next_post() is responsible for incrementing the current post as we saw.
And it also remember we had a property called post in the wp_query instance.
So this function we set this post to the current post in the loop so we have the array posts. it was setted to
the index of the current post, right? And it will also return  the current post.
We also have the_title() and get_the_title(). You can have a look at these but I just want to show you
reset_postdata().
So we've seen in the previous example that we can write our custom query that will override the global
$post object,
right?
And this might cause some bugs as we saw in the example. So we use the wp_reset_postdata() function which
will call a method called reset_postdata() in the WP_Query class.
So what this method will do? It will reset the global $ post available to this post.
And that is the post.
Let's go back to the next_post() function.
This next_post() will contain the current post in the $wp_query global instance.
Right?
So this would be the current post in the loop, the original post.
So I hope this makes sense to you. Take your time and read these source codes and maybe I know this lecture
might be kind of confusing to some of you.
I think rewatching this lecture might make it a lot more clear.
So that's it for now.
See you in the next lecture.